All Possible Paths for a CS and CSE Graduate from Bangladesh
 
Section 1: Content name and page number



Before you start reading, you should know that you need to select a job depending on its growth, starting salary, reputation in society, etc.
So, is selecting CSE a good choice?
Yes. Universities like MIT, Harvard, and IIT pick the top brilliant minds for CS and CSE.
So, if you think you are not the best, you must become the best to nail this subject. Otherwise, this will be a journey full of struggle. Nothing else.
 
 
Generally, there are lots of paths you can pick as a CSE or CS graduate, but some of them are mentioned here in detail.
 
Higher studies: You can go for higher studies after graduation. For that, you need to learn "research technologies" and publish some research papers to get some scholarship.
 
But those who get into top-ranked universities generally have a CGPA of 3.9 or higher and very good publications under reputable professors. You don’t need to do your research under the supervision of any local professors. You can do it under any MIT or Harvard professor as well, despite being in any university. But, how?
 
There is a program called "Research Internship," which opens in the summer in most cases. You can apply for this, and if selected, you have to go to that designated university and stay there for a whole semester. You can complete your research with the professor of your choice and get paid at the same time.
 
Check out this video where Shashwat mentions how he has done his research with MIT, Harvard, and IIT professors: https://youtu.be/jeKGU_JZtfk
 
         
           Going for a Master’s or Ph.D. is a good choice, and university rankings are consequential. Since, high ranked universities prefer high CGPA and excellent research publications, it is highly recommended to maintain the preferred criteria.
 
Growth: It has a very smooth growth, but patience and hard work are a must.
Starting salary: After your Ph.D. or Master's, you can easily earn $150 000–$200 000 each year. However, depending on your skills and university rank, this salary might differ.
2.              Software engineering jobs at Google, Facebook, Microsoft, or Foreign companies or Local companies  :
You can get jobs at foreign companies by applying through their websites.
For example, you can apply to Google from their website:
 
https://careers.google.com/jobs/results/
The same goes for Microsoft or any other foreign company.
You can get notifications of them by following the companies on LinkedIn Jobs, or you can just subscribe to their job alerts.
For Google, you can do this by enabling the notification button.
 
You can also get notified if you have already completed an internship at their company.
For Google, here is their internship page: https://careers.google.com/students/engineering-and-technical-internships/
 
 
Moreover, you can get jobs from referrals as well. For example, if you want to get a job at Google, you can manage Google Recruiters' email or go to LinkedIn and search for "Google Recruiters."
 
 
Reach out to them and share your resume and LinkedIn profile. If they find your profile and resume helpful, they will refer you, and this can help you skip the general steps unlike others. You will be allowed to directly attend all the interviews.
 
Those who advance to the ICPC World Finals or achieve a high ranking on competitive programming websites are also contacted by recruiters.
 
So, problem-solving using data structures and algorithms (DSA) is helpful to bypass the preliminary rounds and reach the interview rounds first hand.
 
So, assuming you reached the interview rounds, check out this thread on Twitter to know how you can clear Google’s interview round: https://twitter.com/shaktimtripathi/status/1585664494994616320
 
Growth: Growth is very competitive, but with great power comes great responsibility. They will teach you a lot and provide you with numerous opportunities. However, advancement in Tech Giants is competitive. Other than this, if you work hard and are a smart person, everything is possible.
 
Sundar Pichai and Satya Nadela left India and started their jobs at Google and Microsoft many years ago. Look for them, where they are now.
 
Note: Sundar Pichai had an IIT Kanpur degree, an MS from Stanford, and an MBA from the University of Pennsylvania.
Satya Nadella also had an MS and an MBA.
 
So, CEOs do need to have an MBA in most cases.
 
Starting salary: Google or any other foreign company's salary depends on a particular country.
It’s $1,23059 per year in the USA, whereas it is 20 lakh rupees per year at Google India.
 
So, it’s a huge gap.
 
But there isn't much of a difference. How?
If you stay in the USA, you need to pay 40% tax annually. In addition, living and food costs are very high. Thus, the salary they pay at Google USA is not that huge and is pretty basic compared to remote jobs.
 
Software engineering or developer roles at Bangladeshi companies:
You can also join local companies for software engineering, cloud engineering, network engineering, DevOps engineering, etc.
If you don’t know what these paths are, check out this blog: https://www.technojobs.co.uk/info/it-job-roles/different-types-of-tech-engineering-roles.phtml
 
In a company, you can have developers who develop code, a technical architect who designs a system and has a vast knowledge of every system, a cloud engineer who works in the cloud, a cloud architect who designs the system on the cloud, and many more.
 
However, the starting salary at a local company is between 40 and 50,000 takas.
 
Growth: You can get promotions at a good rate.
 
 
3.      Teaching Profession: If you have a good CGPA or a Master’s or Ph.D. degree from a foreign country, you can become a teacher easily.
 
Starting salary for teachers with bachelor’s degrees: 70-80k taka at reputed private universities.
Teachers with Master's or doctoral degrees can expect to earn between $2,500 and $3,000 per month as a starting salary.
 
Growth: For graduates who just have a bachelor’s degree, growth is tough. For promotions, you need more years of experience and a higher degree than others. Foreign countries such as the United States and Canada will almost certainly give you an advantage over others.
 
4.      Corporate Profession: You can get jobs at corporate companies like Robi, Banglalink, etc. You must have business competition experience for this, as the selection process includes more business quizzes and business analysis than technical interviews. A 3+ of CGPA is more than enough to get you a job in a corporation.
 
Starting salary: It’s almost 70–90k per month.
Growth: Growth depends on the excellence of your job.

 
5.	Non-Technical Professions: You can go for non-technical jobs if you wish to.
 Suggested path for your 4 years:
 1st year: Explore different fields of CS and CSE and choose a path where you will progress.
For example, after exploring 5–10 paths, you have decided to do a Master's at a top-ranked university in machine learning.
 
2nd year: Take part in community works like the Microsoft Learn Student Ambassador programs, the Google Developer Group program, the AWS Community Builder program, the GitHub Campus Expert program, and many more. These will give you exposure and lots of resources to learn and develop a global identity.
 
Moreover, as you have already decided which path to follow, you can now focus on your learning.
 
3rd year: Start working on research papers if you want to go for higher studies, or start gaining more technical experience through Open Source, hackathons, and paid internships.
 
Note: Never ever go for unpaid Bangladeshi internships. Also, there are some companies that take money from you for internships. Be very careful about them.
Also, if you are properly skilled, you can do remote jobs.
 
4th Year: Work on research papers or sharpen your skills and network to get the best-paying job as soon as you graduate.

Paths you can explore in CS or CSE:
Problem-Solving: You can use any language to solve problems using data structures and algorithms. In Google and Microsoft interviews, most technical questions come from data structures and algorithms.
You can also take part in competitions of Codeforces, CSES Ladder, and many other websites.
Universities like BUET, Dhaka University, and North South University have good competitive programming teams, and every year many students join global tech giants from these companies.
 
Benefits:
You should have no trouble passing Google and Microsoft interviews.
 
Problem:
If you just focus on problem-solving, you might not be able to learn any other technical skills. This is a common problem among Bangladeshi CS or CSE students.
 
 
Research Technologies: Technologies that are used for research fall under this category. For example, machine learning, artificial intelligence, natural language processing, etc.
 
Benefit:
Learning research technologies will make one capable enough to go for research internships in Canada and the USA.

 
Problem:
You might not be able to earn money in your student life. One of the main reasons is that topics like machine learning and others necessitate a large amount of data, and the students are rarely exposed to them. Therefore, it is expected that you might not do a lot of work on these topics.
 
Modern Technologies: There are some technologies that are very recent and very demanding due to a lack of skilled engineers.
For example, DevOps, cloud engineering, etc. are very demanding.
 
Benefit:
You can get a remote job easily and earn $150,001–$200,000 per year. Isn’t it awesome?
 
Problem:
As there are more and more updates coming each year, a particular modern technology might not remain in demand for a long time.
 
So, you have to learn something new every day. Maybe you need to learn different languages or topics.
 
 
Moreover, you can have better knowledge than others. This will benefit you in your Master’s or Ph.D. interview and research paper publication as well.

Learn more about open source, hackathons, etc.:
 
1. Open-Source Contribution: 
What is "Open Source"?
The word "open source" means that the source is free and open to all. So which source? It is the source of a project. For example, if you are a Windows or Mac user, you may already use the VLC Player.
 
 
Here is the code that was used to create it: https://github.com/videolan/vlc-ios
https://github.com/videolan/vlc
 
So what can you do there?
You can contribute to their project by going to their GitHub repository.
 
So, how can I contribute?
Generally, you can look for opportunities in issues. Let’s go over their issues.
 
Note: VLC Player does not accept open-source contributions, though. But the source is open.
 
But have you worked with Python?
Let’s go to their GitHub repository and then check the issues. https://github.com/python/cpython 
Here are the issues: https://github.com/python/cpython/issues
You investigate the first problem.
 
Before reading this issue, you should know that these issues can be created by project maintainers or any other general person.
Generally, maintainers create issues when they see small bugs and want someone to solve it for them. And general people or contributors like us do it when they find a problem in the codebase and propose a solution to the issue.
 
Then they create an issue that gets notified by a maintainer.
How can this benefit the general user?
Actually, the maintainer then keeps in mind that you are working on this issue, and if any other person wants to contribute to it, surely he/she won’t prioritize that person. He or she will give the most priority to your pull request (PR).
 
Moreover, when you create a PR, you can mention the issue you created.
Why did you do that?
First, let's see an example from the CNCF Glossary to understand it properly.
Pull request: https://github.com/cncf/glossary/pull/1506
Here you can see a pull request with the tracking issues mentioned.
 
So here, the contributor mentioned how he got permission to work on this pull request.
If you go to the tracking issue: https://github.com/cncf/glossary/issues/410, you will find the following information.
You can see that the contributor asked to contribute to this file, and the maintainer appointed him.
 
Then the contributor worked on the file and created a pull request with the proper files. When the maintainer determined that everything was in order, he merged them into the project.
 
That’s all about it.
 
Other than this, if you don’t find any issues, you can also try to find any mailing addresses of the maintainers. Then you can mail them and share your interest in contributing.
 
Can you contribute as a beginner?
Not yet. Surely you need to know the basics of git and GitHub. Git and GitHub are not synonymous. GitHub was created based on Git, which is a version of control system.
 
Let’s share steps to contribute:
Learn the fundamentals of Git and GitHub.
Learn a particular technology or language. You don’t need to be an expert on that. But depending on the project’s difficulty, you need to learn more and more.
Note: Open-source contributions don’t need to be technical all the time. You can also help with the documentation. Documentation means helping one realize a project properly.
 
Google especially has a program called Google Summer of Docs where you can get paid by contributing to different projects’ documentation.
 
Google Summer of Docs: https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs
 
Don’t worry, you can still get paid for technical contributions. Google has "Google Summer of Code (GSoC)" for that.
 
Google Summer of Code: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/
 
How do I get a job from an open-source contribution?
 
You can contribute to any good project if you have a good understanding of the maintainer. If the maintainer finds you suitable for any technical role in the company, they can surely offer you a job.
 
Furthermore, you can apply your open-source experience to a job.Actually, in offices, 90% of the companies use GitHub, and most importantly, remote jobs use GitHub the most. Your experience in contributing will help you at that time as well.
 
Hackathon:
Hackathons are project competitions. This never includes competitive programming. Here in Bangladesh, very few students work on good projects other than simple web developments.
 
Although hackathons can have topics like website development, machine learning projects, blockchain, cloud projects, and many more. Other than problem-solving most of the technical work goes under Hackathons.
 
As Bangladeshi students work very little on projects, fewer hackathons are organized. But surely you can take part in global hackathons and win prizes.
 
Follow these websites:
MLH Hackathons: https://mlh.io/seasons/2023/events
Dev Post hackathons: https://devpost.com/hackathons
HackerEarth hackathons: https://www.hackerearth.com/challenges/hackathon/
etc.
 
 
Some advice:
Your skill matters. So, if you want to earn rather than paying tuition, try to learn a technology perfectly. You might not be able to earn what your friends earn right now. However, if you are properly skilled, you can earn the same amount of money your friend earned in four years, in a single year.
Disclaimer: Here is Kunal Kushwaha: https://www.linkedin.com/in/kunal-kushwaha/
When he was a student, he had to pay a tax of Rs. 22 lakh per year. Since his university days, he has worked as a DevRel manager and DevOps engineer. He has just graduated in 2022.
 
Also, try to get into a good, ranked university for a Master’s or Ph.D. University rank has a good influence on your salary and jobs. So, if you have a low CGPA, try to go for skill development, modern, or research technologies.
Remember that 7 years of job experience is much more valuable than 7 years of Master’s or Ph.D.
 
Note: Web development, app development, digital marketing, etc. are never a part of CS or CSE. They are simple developments.



QnA or Myths:
If  a non technical person can earn 1lakh-3lakh taka per month by free lancing, shouldn’t we go for free lancing?
Answer:
It depends on the technology you learn. If you go for digital marketing, SEO, etc., it’s surely a bad choice because, as you know, there are various farms and people who are not educated but spend a lot of time on these. They earn through freelancing. Thus, it will be very competitive for you. Moreover, in the near future, these will go away. For example, there was once a high demand for photo editors, but since the introduction of Canva, even the most technical and non-technical people can easily work with it. 
So, you can fully focus on the cs or cse sector and there is enough growth and opportunity than this type of free lancing.

But if you are good at cs sector technologies like Data science, machine learning etc, you can surely gor for freelancing or even remote job.
Should we apply for ambassador programs?
Answer: 
No. The local ambassador programs are generally promotional partners. You can see clubs and companies looking for ambassadors before any event. This is a component of affiliation.
 
But surely you can go for global ambassador programs. They will provide you with learning opportunities and lots of benefits. In return, they expect you to help others learn through your experience.

Sometimes you hear that “Karim got a 2 crore taka package from Google.Do they earn 2 crore per month or each year?”
Answer: No. In reality, they make nowhere near Rs 2 crore.For example, if you get a job at Google India, you will get a 40-lakh package, whereas you will get a 2-crore-taka package if you join Google USA.
 
So, should you go for Google USA? Before knowing that, you must know that if you live in the USA and earn this sort of money, you need to pay almost 40% as tax.
Read this blog : https://www.quora.com/What-percentage-of-their-salary-do-Google-Mountain-View-Engineers-pay-in-taxes
Also, the living costs, food costs, and other costs are pretty high. So, it’s a win-win situation for you. You will get a good working environment, etc. But if you expect that you will have Rs 2 crore by the end of a year, it’s a total mistake.
Let us also hear what this 2 crore taka means. First of all, Google and other tech giants offer a joining bonus, stocks, and many other benefits along with a salary. So, if you sell your stocks after four years, your average annual income will be two crores, plus or minus two crores. 



Global Ambassadors Programs you can apply to
Microsoft Learn Student Ambassador Program:
It’s a beginner friendly program. If you have an active LinkedIn & GitHub profile, you might be a good fit. Although you can still apply for this program if you no profile existing. 
There is no loss in applying, right?
Benefits:
You can moderate Microsoft Imagine Cup
Get all the product keys from Microsoft. (You can not sell any product keys)
You will get LinkedIn learning & LinkedIn Premium.
You will be able to help in Microsoft’s event , Student Summit, Ignite and many more.
You will get  1:1 mentorship from the Microsoft Engineers.
Etc.

GitHub Campus Expert Program: This is  a premium program and we have only 1 GitHub campus expert from Bangladesh. 
Benefits:
You get hackathon and event support from GitHub education.
Moreover, you get many opportunities and features from GitHub in the first instance.


AWS Community Builder: This program is also an intermediate level program.Those who are already working with AWS or AWS certitified and helping people learn AWS by blogs or posts,will have a very good chance over others.
Benefits:
 You will get a AWS Certification voucher to attend your certification exam for free. Also, you will get AWS credits and get opportunities to speak at lots of events.


Google Developer Student Club: This is a program by Google but currently Bangladeshi folks are unable to apply to this program.

According to the APAC (Asia Pacific team) of Google, Bangladeshi students are more into competitive programming and web development kind of stuffs. But at GDSC, students are supposed to work with Google's framework development. Just like Tensorflow, android studio etc.


AWS Cloud Club: AWS is launching their student centric program where you can be a lead to teach folks AWS . 


Other than this, surely you can apply to become a GitKraken Ambassador, Auth0 ambassador and many more. Although these are not only for students, rather professionals are also part of it.



